[docs] v5 stable docs (#3100)
vercel/workflow: docs/content/docs/v5/whats-new.mdx

| `stepEntrypoint` removed from `workflow/runtime` | Framework integrations generate step routes; use `getWorldHandlers()` for custom hosts. |
| The `client` SWC transform mode was removed | It merged into `step` mode. Integrations passing `mode: 'client'` pass `mode: 'step'`. |
| Step, workflow and webhook bundles are ESM | Generated output moved from CJS to ESM, with a `createRequire` banner for CJS dependencies. The VM-executed workflow bundle stays CJS. |
| `NestLocalBuilder` moved out of `@workflow/nest` root | Import it from `workflow/nest/builder`, so `WorkflowModule` no longer pulls the build toolchain into the runtime bundle. `NestVercelBuilder` lives at `workflow/nest/vercel-builder`. |
| `workflow/internal/private` and `@workflow/core/private` removed | These were never public API. The compiler no longer emits imports from them, so regenerate build output rather than importing them yourself. |
| `@workflow/world-local` stream chunks moved | Chunks live at `streams/chunks/<streamName>/`. Files written in the old flat layout are not read back; local development state from 4.x can be deleted. |

> On Next.js 16.2.0-canary.48 and newer, `withWorkflow` now defaults to `lazyDiscovery: true`; older versions fall back to eager discovery automatically.

Reviewer: This is stale: the `lazyDiscovery` option — and the whole deferred-discovery builder path — was removed in `@workflow/next@5.0.0-beta.21` (#2545); discovery at GA is always eager and `workflows.lazyDiscovery` no longer exists (the only remaining references in the repo are CHANGELOG entries). The default-`true` behavior described here only existed between beta.8 (#1805) and beta.20, and v4 never had the option either, so there's no net v4 → 5.0.0 change to document. Suggest dropping this paragraph.

Reviewer: Fixed in a0adc9e0f — dropped the paragraph. (Same commit also folds in Pranay's Vercel toolbar feedback on this page: intro paragraph replaced by a post-install callout, a CopyPrompt for the agent migration, Python dropped from the frameworks bullet, multi-region cross-links, child-workflows-first wording on the event-limit row, and the duplicate-ID row rephrased.)

---
title: What's new in v5?
description: Workflow SDK 5.0 highlights, breaking changes, and how to upgrade from 4.x.
type: guide
summary: See what changed in Workflow SDK 5.0 and how to move an app from 4.x.
related:
  - /docs/getting-started
  - /docs/configuration
  - /docs/foundations/cancellation
---

Workflow SDK 5.0 is the current release. `npm install workflow` installs 5.x, and these docs describe it.

> Workflow 4.x is in maintenance: it stays installable as `workflow@4`, receives stability fixes only, and its documentation lives at [/v4/docs](/v4/docs).

Author: ```suggestion
Workflow SDK v5 is out now, and Workflow SDK v4 has moved to maintenance status: it stays installable as `workflow@4`, receives stability fixes only, and its documentation lives at [/v4/docs](/v4/docs).

We recommend upgrading to v5 to get all of the performance, cost, and feature improvements listed below.

Breaking changes are mainly limited to programmatic use of the core APIs, and third-party worlds.
```

```bash

> npm install workflow@latest

Author: ```suggestion
npm install workflow@latest
# Use the included migration skill:
npx skills add https://github.com/vercel/workflow --skill migrating-workflow-v4-to-v5
```

**Payloads are compressed** before they are encrypted and sent to the API. Repetitive payloads compress heavily; AI token streams average around 80% smaller. That is less stored data and less to move over the network.

Together, time to first step — from `start()` to your first step body executing — is about half of what it was in v4.

On [Vercel Workflows](/worlds/vercel) these benefits compound to reduce compute costs by up to 80% for workflows made of many small steps, and storage cost by up to 70%, depending on the workload. Depending on your setup, you may see similar gains using self-hosted or third-party Worlds.

### Multi-region support

Workflow run IDs are now tagged with the compute region they were created in, or the region specified when calling `start()`. Worlds can use this to pin execution to that region.
This is now the default when deploying to Vercel, and run data will automatically be co-located with the compute region that the run was started in.

> ### Cooperative cancellation

Author: ```suggestion
### Inflight cancellation
```

> `AbortController` and `AbortSignal` are serializable. A controller created inside a workflow function survives suspensions, and its signal can be passed into steps, into `fetch()`, and into child runs — so a workflow can abandon in-flight work without waiting for it to finish.

Author: ```suggestion
`AbortController` and `AbortSignal` are now serializable, and signals can be passed into steps, so a workflow can abandon in-flight work without waiting for a step to finish.
```

Vercel Observability can search runs by attribute. `workflow inspect` and the local web UI read them from `world.analytics` on any World that implements it.

See [Attributes](/docs/observability/attributes).

### A redesigned trace viewer, in the open-source package

The trace viewer is a ground-up replacement: a minimap with pan, zoom and brush, alt-drag span-to-span time measurement, keyboard navigation, virtualization for large runs, inline decryption of encrypted payloads, and an attributes card.

It has been available in Vercel Observability for a while — see the [redesign](https://vercel.com/changelog/redesigned-trace-viewer-for-vercel-workflows) and [minimap](https://vercel.com/changelog/vercel-workflows-trace-viewer-now-has-a-minimap) changelogs. v5 ships the same viewer to open-source users against any World:

```bash
npx workflow inspect runs --web
```

> See [Observability](/docs/observability).

Author: ```suggestion
The trace viewer has been rebuilt from the ground-up, with an easily visible timeline, a minimap, pan, zoom, debug functionality, a new JSON viewer, keyboard navigation, and more.

Vercel Observability uses this trace viewer for all runs, v4 included, but with v5, you get the same new design for self-hosted UI and local debugging. See [Observability](/docs/observability).

```bash
npx workflow inspect runs --web
```
```

### Also new in 5.0

- **`start()` from inside a workflow.** Spawn a child run or hand off to a new run directly in a workflow function, without wrapping it in a step. See [Starting workflows](/docs/foundations/starting-workflows).
- **Stronger hook coordination.** `hook.getConflict()` resolves with the conflicting [`Run`](/docs/api-reference/workflow-api/get-run) rather than a bare `{ runId }`, so a duplicate can `await conflict.status`, `await conflict.returnValue`, or `await conflict.cancel()` directly. See [Run idempotency](/docs/foundations/idempotency#run-idempotency).
- **Errors keep their type.** `WorkflowRunFailedError.cause` preserves the original class identity and cause chain, including your own error classes. See [Serialization](/docs/foundations/serialization).

> - **Tracing and analytics.** Tracing defaults to `linked`, making each workflow and step invocation its own trace root with span links to the enqueue site and the run origin. `world.analytics` adds metadata-only listings for runs, steps, events, hooks, waits, and attributes. See [Tracing](/docs/observability/tracing).

Author: ```suggestion
```

> - **A configuration reference.** Every `WORKFLOW_*` environment variable, framework plugin option, and CLI flag is documented in one place. See [Configuration](/docs/configuration).

Author: ```suggestion
```

> - **More frameworks.** [React Router](/docs/getting-started/react-router) (v7 and v8, via Nitro) and [NestJS](/docs/getting-started/nestjs) have first-class guides, and [Python](/docs/getting-started/python) workflows are in beta.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Support for more frameworks.** [React Router](/docs/getting-started/react-router) (v7 and v8, via Nitro) is now supported, and [NestJS](/docs/getting-started/nestjs) and [Python](/docs/getting-started/python) workflows are in beta.
```

On Next.js 16.2.0-canary.48 and newer, `withWorkflow` now defaults to `lazyDiscovery: true`; older versions fall back to eager discovery automatically.

Runs created on 4.x keep executing on the deployment that created them, so upgrading a deployment does not migrate in-flight runs — and, given the seed change above, must not. One storage caveat is worth knowing about: failed runs stored by `@workflow/world-postgres` before the upgrade read back with `error: undefined`, because the payload lives in the legacy `error` text column rather than `errorJson`.

## Migrating from V4

An agent skill automates the mechanical parts of the upgrade — the renamed World methods, the removed exports, the Nest builder subpath, and the `getConflict()` shape — and flags the places that need a human decision.

```bash
npx skills add https://github.com/vercel/workflow --skill migrating-workflow-v4-to-v5
```

Then ask your agent to migrate the project, for example: *"Upgrade this app from Workflow SDK 4.x to 5.0."* The skill reads the code, applies the rules above, and reports what it changed and what it could not.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

---
title: What's new in v5?
description: Workflow SDK 5.0 highlights, breaking changes, and how to upgrade from 4.x.
type: guide
summary: See what changed in Workflow SDK 5.0 and how to move an app from 4.x.
related:
  - /docs/getting-started
  - /docs/configuration
  - /docs/foundations/cancellation
---

Workflow SDK v5 is out now, and Workflow SDK v4 has moved to maintenance status: it stays installable as `workflow@4`, receives stability fixes only, and its documentation lives at [/v4/docs](/v4/docs).

We recommend upgrading to v5 to get all of the performance, cost, and feature improvements listed below.

> Breaking changes are mainly limited to programmatic use of the core APIs, and third-party worlds.

Author: ```suggestion
We recommend upgrading to v5 to get all of the performance, cost, and feature improvements listed below. It's as simple as installing the migration skill and telling your agent to your app from Workflow SDK v4 to v5.
```

```bash
npm install workflow@latest

> # Use the included migration skill:

Author: ```suggestion
```

npx skills add https://github.com/vercel/workflow --skill migrating-workflow-v4-to-v5
```

Most 4.x application code compiles and runs unchanged. The workflow and step programming model, the `"use workflow"` / `"use step"` directives, `start()`, hooks, webhooks, streams, and the event log are all the same. The breaking changes below are concentrated in low-level runtime APIs and build integrations.

> Several of the features below shipped during the v5 beta and were announced separately; they are now generally available, and the linked changelogs have the details.

Author: ```suggestion
```

## Highlights

### Faster and cheaper runs

> The largest change in v5 has no API surface: the runtime does far less work per unit of progress. Three mechanisms compound.

Author: ```suggestion
The largest change in v5 has no API surface: the runtime does far less work per unit of progress. The time between calling `start()` and your first step body executing is now less than half of what it was in v4. This is made possible by many smaller optimizations:
```

> **A workflow invocation now does as much as it can in a single pass.** In 4.x, progress was largely deferred to the queue: an invocation would execute a step, hand back to the queue, and let a fresh invocation pick up the next one. v5 creates and executes steps inline — several per suspension, in parallel (`WORKFLOW_MAX_INLINE_STEPS`, default 3) — and only returns to the queue when it genuinely has to: a wait, a hook, or the function approaching its timeout. You pay network and cold-start overhead at those boundaries instead of at every step.

Author: ```suggestion
**A workflow invocation now does as much as it can in a single pass.** In 4.x, progress was largely deferred to the queue: an invocation would execute a step, hand back to the queue, and let a fresh invocation pick up the next one. v5 creates and executes steps inline — several per suspension, in parallel, and only uses the queue when it really has to: a wait, a hook, or the function is approaching its timeout.
```

> **The runtime avoids waiting on the persistence layer where it can determine that is safe for your workload.** Turbo mode backgrounds the `run_started` write and skips the initial event-log load on a run's first invocation. Step creation is folded into step execution rather than being its own round trip. The inline loop consumes the event-log delta from the previous step's write instead of re-listing events. Each optimization is gated on runtime conditions, and each can be turned off — see [Runtime tuning](/docs/configuration/runtime-tuning).

Author: ```suggestion
**The runtime avoids waiting on the persistence layer where it can determine that is safe for your workload.** Many API calls are now simply skipped when not needed, like requesting the event-log on a run's first invocation. Step creation is folded into step execution rather than being its own round trip. The inline loop consumes the event-log delta from the previous step's write instead of re-listing events. Each optimization is gated on specific runtime conditions, and can be turned off individually — see [Runtime tuning](/docs/configuration/runtime-tuning).
```

> **Payloads are compressed** before encryption — zstd where available, gzip as a portable fallback. Repetitive payloads compress heavily; AI token streams average around 80% smaller. That is less stored data and less to move over the network.

Author: ```suggestion
**Payloads are compressed** before they are encrypted and sent to the API. Repetitive payloads compress heavily; AI token streams average around 80% smaller. That is less stored data and less to move over the network.
```

Together, time to first step — from `start()` to your first step body executing — is about half of what it was in v4.

> On [Vercel Workflows](/worlds/vercel) we expect compute cost to fall by up to 80% for workflows made of many small steps, and storage cost by up to 70%, depending on the workload. The mechanisms are not Vercel-specific: fewer function invocations, fewer queue messages, fewer round trips to storage, and fewer stored bytes reduce the bill on any [World](/worlds), against whatever your own infrastructure charges for them.

Author: ```suggestion
On [Vercel Workflows](/worlds/vercel) these benefits compound to reduce compute costs by up to 80% for workflows made of many small steps, and storage cost by up to 70%, depending on the workload. Depending on your setup, you may see similar gains using self-hosted or third-party Worlds.
```

> See [Turbo mode](/docs/changelog/turbo-mode), [Lazy event creation](/docs/changelog/lazy-event-creation), [Eager processing](/docs/changelog/eager-processing), and the [payload compression changelog](https://vercel.com/changelog/workflow-sdk-now-compresses-run-and-step-payloads).

Author: ```suggestion
```

> ### Run state can live in any region

Author: ```suggestion
### Multi-region support
```

> `World.createRunId()` and the `region` option on queue dispatch let a World mint its own run IDs and route a run's messages to a specific region, so run state can live next to the compute that produces it.

Author: ```suggestion
Workflow run IDs are now tagged with the compute region they were created in, or the region specified when calling `start()`. Worlds can use this to pin execution to that region.
```

> `@workflow/world-vercel` implements this: [Vercel Workflows now serves data and traffic in every Vercel region](https://vercel.com/changelog/vercel-workflows-global-4Dgx1gL3NAuSqGhjRIMFpo), colocating run data where the run starts, which removes a cross-region hop for every run that does not start in `iad1`.

Author: ```suggestion
This is now the default when deploying to Vercel, and run data will automatically be co-located with the compute region that the run was started in.
```

Runs created on 4.x keep executing on the deployment that created them, so upgrading a deployment does not migrate in-flight runs — and, given the seed change above, must not. One storage caveat is worth knowing about: failed runs stored by `@workflow/world-postgres` before the upgrade read back with `error: undefined`, because the payload lives in the legacy `error` text column rather than `errorJson`.

## Migrating from V4

An agent skill automates the mechanical parts of the upgrade — the renamed World methods, the removed exports, the Nest builder subpath, and the `getConflict()` shape — and flags the places that need a human decision.

```bash
npx skills add https://github.com/vercel/workflow --skill migrating-workflow-v4-to-v5
```

Then ask your agent to migrate the project, for example: *"Upgrade this app from Workflow SDK 4.x to 5.0."* The skill reads the code, applies the rules above, and reports what it changed and what it could not.

## Staying on 4.x

4.x remains installable as `workflow@4` and receives stability fixes. Pin it explicitly if you are not ready to upgrade:

```json
{
  "dependencies": {
    "workflow": "^4.6.0"
  }
}
```

> The 4.x documentation is at [/v4/docs](/v4/docs), and the version switcher at the top of the sidebar moves between the two.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Everything that crosses a workflow/step boundary is serialized, and v5 widens what survives the trip with its identity intact. Errors — including your own classes and built-ins like `TypeError` — keep their class and `cause` chain through `WorkflowRunFailedError.cause`:

```typescript lineNumbers
import { WorkflowRunFailedError } from "workflow/errors";
import { getRun } from "workflow/api";
declare class PaymentDeclinedError extends Error {} // @setup

try {
  await getRun(runId).returnValue;
} catch (error) {
  if (
    error instanceof WorkflowRunFailedError &&
    error.cause instanceof PaymentDeclinedError // [!code highlight]
  ) {
    // your class, not a flattened generic Error
  }
}
```

Workflow function references and [`Run`](/docs/api-reference/workflow-api/get-run) handles are serializable too, so a step can receive a workflow function to `start()` or a run handle to await. And when a value cannot cross a boundary, the failure is precise instead of generic: dedicated [`SerializationError`](/docs/api-reference/workflow-errors) and structured context-violation errors name the offending value and where it was used.

See [Serialization](/docs/foundations/serialization).

> ### A redesigned trace viewer, in the open-source package

Author: ```suggestion
### A redesigned trace viewer
```

Vercel Observability uses this trace viewer for all runs, v4 included, but with v5, you get the same new design for self-hosted UI and local debugging. See [Observability](/docs/observability).

The local tooling around it grew as well: on [Nitro](/docs/getting-started/nitro) the dev server has the web UI built in at `/_workflow`, `workflow inspect runs` accepts `--since`/`--until` listing windows, run lookups by name search past the backend's default 24-hour window, and Worlds can surface their own run fields in `inspect` output — the Vercel World shows each run's region. On any other framework, `createWorkflowWebHandler()` from `@workflow/web/handler` serves the same UI as one `Request` to `Response` handler under a base path of your choosing.

Each run also carries more of the infrastructure it ran on. A step attempt records the compute instance that executed it, surfaced as **Compute Instance ID** in the run sidebar and as a `faas.instance` span attribute on flow and step spans, so a run that behaves oddly can be correlated with one warm instance. The sidebar also shows a copyable **Request ID** for looking the invocation up in your platform's logs.

> ### Hook tokens can outlive their run

Author: ```suggestion
### Custom hook token retention
```

> A [Hook](/docs/foundations/hooks) token is normally reserved only while its workflow is running. Pass `experimental_minRetention` to [`createHook()`](/docs/api-reference/workflow/create-hook#keep-a-token-unavailable-after-the-run-ends) to keep the token unavailable for at least a given duration after the Hook is created, so a duplicate request arriving after the original run finished still collides instead of starting fresh work. This is how [run idempotency](/docs/foundations/idempotency#run-idempotency) becomes durable rather than only concurrent.

Author: ```suggestion
A [Hook](/docs/foundations/hooks) token is normally reserved only while its workflow is running. Pass `experimental_minRetention` to [`createHook()`](/docs/api-reference/workflow/create-hook#keep-a-token-unavailable-after-the-run-ends) to keep the token unavailable for at least a given duration after the Hook is created, so a duplicate request arriving after the original run finished still collides instead of starting fresh work. This allows for durable [run idempotency](/docs/foundations/idempotency#run-idempotency) with custom durations.
```
